Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA.
It’s a network simulator with tons of guided
labs covering all of the topics you need to
know for the CCNA.
Click the link in the video description to
check it out.
In this lab we’ll configure voice VLANs
and then observe some traffic in the network.
There are two PCs, each connected to an IP
phone, and the IP phones are connected to
SW1.
SW1 is a multilayer switch, but we won’t
be using its Layer 3 capabilities in this
lab.
I selected this model because it supports
PoE, Power over Ethernet.
So, if I click on phone1 for example, you
can see the power cable is not connected.
However, because SW1 supports PoE phone1 is
on and receiving power via the ethernet cable.
So, instead of SW1 acting as the router, we’ll
configure router on a stick between SW1 and
R1.
First I’ll configure SW1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. I’ll configure G1/0/2 and 3 first,
connected to the IP phones.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/2 – 3.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
Now, the data VLAN is VLAN10 as I indicate
in the diagram.
So, SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 10.
And the voice VLAN should be VLAN20, so SWITCHPORT
VOICE VLAN 20.
Ok, that’s all of the configuration needed
on these interfaces.
Next we have to configure router on a stick
between SW1 and R1.
Although we won’t actually be sending any
traffic between subnets in this lab, we need
to make sure that phone1 and phone2 can reach
R1.
I pre-configured some telephony settings on
R1 so it can tell phone1 and phone2 how they
should configure themselves.
Those configurations are beyond the scope
of the CCNA so I won’t cover them, but you
can check out R1’s running-config if you
want to see what configurations I did.
Okay, let’s configure SW1’s trunk.
INTERFACE G1/0/1.
SWITCHPORT TRUNK ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Now, by default all VLANs are allowed, but
it’s best to limit the allowed VLANs to
only those you need.
So, SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED VLAN 10,20.
Okay, that’s all of the configuration needed
on SW1.
Next I’ll configure R1’s end.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE F0/0.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, next I’ll configure two subinterfaces
for router on a stick.
INTERFACE F0/0.10.
ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q 10.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.10.1 255.255.255.0.
That’s for the data VLAN, and next the voice
VLAN.
INTERFACE F0/0.20.
ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q 20.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.20.1 255.255.255.0.
Okay, that’s all of the configuration needed
on R1.
Now let’s send some network traffic and
check it out in simulation mode.
First, I’ll go on PC1.
I’ll ping PC2 and let’s see if the traffic
is tagged.
First, I’ll ping in realtime mode.
PING 192.168.10.12.
Okay, the ping works.
Now I’ll switch to simulation mode and try
again.
PING 192.168.10.12.
So, let’s check out the frame here and click
on outbound PDU details.
Is the traffic tagged?
No it isn’t.
There is no 802.1Q tag in the frame.
Okay I’ll switch back to realtime mode.
Just to make sure my configurations are correct
I’ll ping R1, too.
PING 192.168.10.1.
Okay, no problem.
Now it’s time to check out the phones.
I’ll call phone2 from phone1.
So what’s phone2’s phone number?
I’ll go to phone2 and click on the GUI tab.
The phone number is displayed here, 2010.
How did it get the number?
It was assigned by R1.
So, SW1 told the phones what VLAN they are
in, and then R1 told them what phone numbers
to use, their IP addresses, etc.
So, now I’ll go to phone1.
First I’ll go back to simulation mode.
And I’ll call phone 2.
2 0 1 0, and then click on the phone to pick
it up.
Notice that an SCCP, skinny client control
protocol, message is sent.
SCCP is not something you need to know for
the CCNA, by the way.
If we check out the message, in the IP header
you can see the IP address that was assigned
to phone1 as the source IP.
Below it you can see ‘Dot1q header’.
So, that means this frame is tagged with a
VLAN, it’s using dot1q.
In ‘outbound PDU details’ you can see
it here, TPID 8100, which means dot1q.
And in TCI, tag control information, you can
see the VLAN ID.
Hexadecimal 0014 is equivalent to decimal
20, so this frame is tagged in VLAN 20.
That’s because we configured SWITCHPORT
VOICE VLAN 20 on SW1’s interfaces.
Okay, in this lab we configured voice VLANs
and observed that traffic sent from the PCs
is not tagged with a VLAN ID, but traffic
sent from the phones is tagged with a VLAN
ID.
Note that this applies not only to traffic
sent from the PCs or from the phones, but
also to traffic sent to the PCs or to the
phones by SW1.
SW1 will not tag traffic sent to the PCs,
but will tag traffic sent to the phones.
That’s all for this lab.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus lab in
Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.